---
layout: post
title: SSL (Secure Socket Layer)

---
**What is SSL?** <br>
SSL: Secure Sockets Layer. It's the standard technology for keeping an internet connection secure and safeguarding any sensitive data that is being sent between two systems typically a server and a client, preventing criminals from reading and modifying any information transferred, including potential personal details. SSL is the predecessor to the modern TLS encryption used today.

> A website that implements SSL/TLS has **HTTPS** in its URL(Uniform Resource Locator) instead of "HTTP".


**How does SSL/TLS work?** <br>
For a website to achieve a high level of privacy, SSL/TLS encrypts data that is transmitted across the web. Anyone who tries to intercept the data will only see characters that wont make sense and hard to decrypt.

When a browser requests to access a website that is secured by SSL/TLS, the browser and the web server establish an SSL connection using a process called an **SSL/TLS Handshake** to verify that both entities are really who they claim to be.

> The SSL/TLS Handshake is invisible to the user and happens instantaneously. Three keys are used to set up the SSL connection:- the public, private, and session keys, the private and public keys can be used with a publicly trusted certificate to negotiate an encrypted and authenticated communication session over the internet.

**What is an SSL certificate?** <br>
An SSL certificate is a type of digital certificate that provides authentication for a website verifying who you claim to be.

> SSL/TLS can only be implemented by websites that have an "SSL/TLS certificate".

**What are the types of SSL certificates?** <br>
- Single-Domain - secures one domain name or subdomain name.
- Wildcard - secures one domain name and an unlimited number of its subdomains.
- Multi-Domain - secures multiple domain names.

**How can one obtain an SSL/TLS certificate?** <br>
SSL certificate can be purchased from a web service company which is a certificate authority.<br>
The web service company:
- Researches your company/online presence.
- Checks references to determine your company's legitimacy.