---
layout: post
title: Composer PHP dependency manager
---
**What is composer?<br>**
Composer is a dependency management tool for PHP. It allows you to declare the libraries your project depends on and manages them for you (installing or updating).

**Why should you use composer?**<br>
If you have been using vanilla php for a while you find that you **recreate** the same tpe of functionality over and over again such as user authentication, application  routing, database management and not forgetting the helper classes and functions. wouldn`t it be better or more convenient to create this functionality once and **re-use** it in multiple projects?

You probably thinking "i can just copy over a file or line of code", but what if the environment changes or the codebase(source code) is different? You will have to rewrite code in-order to make it work with the new app.

Imagine you had a way of managing all your code and dependencies, then re-using your code on a new project would be much easier and convenient. And thats exactly why you need composer.

**How do you install composer?**<br>
**Linux / MacOS installation**

> `Composer requires PHP 5.3.2+ to run`.

1. Download Composer from the official website using the following command:<br>

```
php -r "copy('https://getcomposer.org/installer', 'composer-setup.php');"
```

2. Verify the installer’s signature (SHA-384) to ensure that the installer file is not corrupt. using the following command:<br>

```
 php -r "if (hash_file('sha384', 'composer-setup.php') === 'e0012edf3e80b6978849f5eff0d4b4e4c79ff1609dd1e613307e16318854d24ae64f26d17af3ef0bf7cfb710ca74755a') { echo 'Installer verified'; } else { echo 'Installer corrupt'; unlink('composer-setup.php'); } echo PHP_EOL;"
 ```

Now you can install composer `locally` or `globally`. Local installation means that the dependency manager will be stored in your current working directory, and you have to specify the path before executing corresponding commands. Meanwhile, global installation allows you to run Composer from anywhere on your system.

- Local installation
> php composer-setup.php

- Global installation
```
php composer-setup.php --install-dir=/usr/local/bin --filename=composer
```

If all the commands are issued correctly then you will see a message smilar to this:
```
All settings correct for using Composer
Downloading...
Composer (version 1.10.5) successfully installed to: /usr/local/bin/composer
```

3. After the installation is complete remove the installer:
> php -r "unlink('composer-setup.php');"

4. Test the Composer installation by running the command:
> composer

The command line will display composer version:
```
______
  / ____/___ ____ ___ ____ ____ ________ _____
 / / / __ / __ `__ / __ / __ / ___/ _ / ___/
/ /___/ /_/ / / / / / / /_/ / /_/ (__ ) __/ /
____/____/_/ /_/ /_/ .___/____/____/___/_/
                  /_/

Composer version 1.10.5 2020-02-12 16:20:11
```

How do you use composer?

How do you update composer?
- Existing project and you want to update a package version 
- Existing project and you want to work with an older package version 

How do you configure composer?
- Old project with an existing composer.json  file 